template: article.html
title: Happy Birthday, Robert Negus
date: 2005-12-21
tags: melanoma, Robert-Negus

My father-in-law, Robert Negus, would have been 75 today. He was an
amazing person, and I liked him a lot. He's pictured here, in
December, 2000, holding his infant grandaughter, Arden--my
daughter, his second grandchild.

![Robert Negus](/images/bob_negus_1.jpg)

He was the most versatile engineer I've ever met. He literally
could build anything. In his later years, he was a blade test
engineer for Boeing, working out of their Ridley Park, Pa.,
facilities. He worked for Boeing for most of his long career. But
that was just a part of who he was.

As I said, he could build anything. There are gadgets galore in his
workshop, to this day. Plug them in, and they still work.

He did his own plumbing. He inspected his own cars. Using an old
automobile engine and his considerable metal-working skills, he
built his own lawn tractor.

![Robert Negus](/images/bob_negus_2.jpg)

One summer, he decided that the one thing he hated most about
exterior painting was scraping paint. So he built his own water
compressor, which he then used to blast the paint off his house and
his rental property. He spent a good hour describing to me his
trial-and-error efforts to get the nozzle diameter just right.

When my wife, Charlotte, was still a child, her dad decided to hook
up to public water and sewer himself, rather than pay someone to do
it. He rented a backhoe, figured out how to use it, dug the holes,
and laid his own pipe.

He was one of the most inventive people I have ever known.

He had his flaws, for sure. (Don't we all?) He wasn't the most
emotionally accessible man. And he did not suffer fools gladly, a
trait many engineers and geeks share. But once he decided someone
was competent, that was pretty much it.

I remember a particular incident of that sort, early in our
marriage. I was installing a ceiling fan in the bedroom of our
first house. In the middle of this effort, Charlotte's parents
stopped by for a visit. Bob came upstairs to see what I was doing.
I had just finished sawing a hole in the drywall and attaching the
electrical box to the joist, and I was working on attaching the fan
to the box. He watched me for a minute, then said, "Well, it looks
like you're doing just fine, Brian," and went back downstairs to
visit with Charlotte. On the one hand, I'd have been happy for the
help, especially from him; it would've made the job go faster. On
the other hand, I really appreciated his vote of confidence.

He and I got along just fine, perhaps because there's enough geek
in me that I could relate to and understand a lot of his seemingly
esoteric interests.

Robert Negus was diagnosed with
[metastatic melanoma][]
while Charlotte was pregnant with our daughter. Charlotte spent a
good part of her pregnancy shuttling him to and from the doctor and
the hospital, in an ultimately vain effort to buy him more time. He
died February 5, 2001--barely a month after he turned 70, and not
even three months after our daughter was born.

He died too young.

He left behind a wife, two daughters, two sons-in-law and two
grandchildren.

December 21st and February 5th are sad days in our house, every
year. Charlotte still misses her dad, of course--all the more so on
those two days.

I miss him, too, and we both grieve that our daughter will never
know her maternal grandfather. I never knew *my* maternal
grandfather, and I would like to have known him. And I'm sorry that
Arden's Grandpa Negus isn't here to delight in watching another
granddaughter grow up.

Happy Birthday, Bob. We're thinking of you. We miss you. And, we
love you.

[metastatic melanoma]: http://www.webmd.com/hw/health_guide_atoz/hw206142.asp
