{{
page.templates: article=%s.html, printable-article=%spr.html
page.title: Sanity Clause
page.tags: photography, digital-photography, photo-with-santa
page.date: 2005-12-12 03:51:00
---
The high price of Santa photos.


}}

This weekend, we took our daughter to the local
[mall][] to have her picture taken
with [Santa Claus][].
(We're ambivalent about the whole lying-to-your-kid-about-Santa
thing, but it's impossible to escape The Claus in this culture. And
our daughter, like most five-year-olds, is really into it.)

This year, there was a notice I didn't remember from last year. The
event's sponsor,
[an outfit][] that
evidently does a lot of these things, kindly requested that parents
refrain from using personal photographic equipment, so that they
could continue to afford to bring Santa to the mall to delight the
children.

*Ahem* Give me a break.

The whole picture-with-Santa gig appears to be a lucrative one--for
the photo company, at least, though "Santa" seems to do the bulk of
the heavy lifting. (For the past several years, the Santa at this
gig is a very kind and pleasant elderly man with a perfect Santa
beard. Sure, let the old guy do all the physical labor.) The photo
packages start at $15.99 and go up to $32.99. For $15.99, you get
*one* 3"x5" photo an two key chains with photos. For $17.99, you
get two 3"x5" photos. And so on.

Let's do a back-of-the-envelope calculation. There were easily 100
kids waiting to see Santa by the time he got back from his
2:30-3:00 break. So, let's assume "Santa" sees 500 kids a day.
Let's figure maybe half of the parents opted for some kind of
photo. (I think that's conservative; few people are going to wait
in line for more than an hour, with antsy bored kids, and then
refuse to get a picture.) Prices ranged from $15.99 to $32.99.
Assume a low-ball average of $20 per kid, 250 kids a day. That's
$5,000 a day, $10,000 for the weekend. Again, that's probably a low
estimate.

You know that isn't all going to "Santa." Or to the "elves" taking
the pictures. And it sure as hell isn't going into
photo-processing. The photos are printed, complete with cheesy
borders, right then and there, on an inkjet photo printer that's
pretty much the same as the one I have in my home. And, when we
finally got to the front of the very long line, I was not very
surprised to find that they were using a
[Nikon D70][],
identical to the one I own. In fact, my every-day lens might even
be better than the one they had on their camera..

The fact is, I take better photos of my daughter than a low-paid
snapshooter banging out prints for the crowd. And why not? I have
some skill as a photographer, and she's *my* daughter. So, I
decided to ask them if I could use my camera to take some pictures
of my daughter on Santa's lap, as long as I agreed to pay for one
of their pictures. I think that's fair. I wasn't cheating them out
of anything; if they'd refused, I wasn't going to buy a
higher-priced package anyway. When I asked one of the "elves," she
was okay with that arrangement.

As luck would have it, just as my daughter sat down on Santa's lap,
they had a printer malfunction or something. I fired off 20 digital
shots of her and Santa, while we waited for the official
photographer to come back and take the "real" photo. After five
*very long* minutes of waiting and holding up the line, we elected
to move on and let the next child take his turn with Santa.

So we didn't end up paying after all, and we got some excellent
photos of our daughter with Santa.

This is quite the nice deal the photo company has lined up for
themselves. And who can fault them for it? Their prices seem high
to me, but there's no shortage of customers, judging by the workout
their printer and cash register were getting today.

I'm thinking a Santa suit might be a good investment.

[mall]: http://www.kingofprussiamall.com/
[Santa Claus]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Santa_Claus
[an outfit]: http://www.cherryhillphoto.com/santame.htm
[Nikon D70]: http://www.nikonusa.com/template.php?cat=1&amp;grp=2&amp;productNr=25214
