{{
page.templates: article=%s.html, printable-article=%spr.html
page.title: Don't look now, but I think we're being watched...
page.tags: surveillance, privacy, crime
page.date: 2006-02-11 05:15:01
---
Does video surveillance really make us safer? (You can probably
imagine my answer...)


}}

Today's
[Philadelphia Inquirer][]
reports that
[a city councilman is pushing for a referendum on installing video surveillance cameras on public streets.][]
Here's an excerpt:

> Councilman Darrell L. Clarke yesterday introduced a measure that
> would pave the way for a referendum on whether the city should
> install video-surveillance cameras on public streets. Increasingly
> common across the country, such systems have been celebrated for
> slashing crime in Baltimore, Wilmington and other cities. But
> they've also been criticized as a dangerous encroachment on civil
> liberties.
> 
> Clarke said the controversy was why he favored putting the issue to
> voters rather than just the 16 members of Council.
> 
> "This is something, given the sensitive nature, that I know
> personally I would want the citizens to ask for it ... as opposed
> to us imposing this 'Big Brother' atmosphere," Clarke said.
> 
> But Clarke made it clear he doesn't share those concerns - and said
> he didn't think voters would, either.
> 
> "About two or three murders a day," he responded when asked why the
> cameras were a good idea.

This is not a good development. People can be convinced to give up
a lot of freedoms for the promise of security. But it's not at all
clear that this "solution" to rampant crime is anything more than
an empty promise.

A May, 2005, report by the
[Electronic Privacy Information Center][],
entitled
*More Cities Deploy Camera Surveillance Systems with Federal Grant Money*
([link][]),
states:

> The average Briton is seen by 300 cameras per day, according to
> estimates. However, several studies have shown that these systems
> have very little effect on crime. In 2002, the British Home Office
> examined 22 camera surveillance systems in North America and the
> United Kingdom, and found that such systems had a small effect on
> crime. (See *Home Office Study at 45; PHR 2004 at 95-104.*) It is
> more effective to place more officers on the streets and improve
> lighting in high-crime areas. (See
> *Home Office Study; NACRO Study.*)

Many of these systems are being funded with federal dollars.
According to the EPIC report:

-   Chicago has 2,250 cameras in its "Homeland Security Grid,"
    which DHS helped finance with a $5.1 million grant, and will be
    adding cameras in the next two years with funds from another $48
    million grant from Homeland Security.
-   Baltimore has used federal grants to finance its camera system
    and $1.3 million "Watch Center."

The Inquirer story does mention that this crime-fighting approach
has its detractors:

> People who study crime, however, say there remains great
> disagreement over the actual effect of the technology. Some
> scholars argue that the cameras' deterrent effect wears off and
> that the investment in cameras pulls resources away from community
> policing.

But the article quotes more proponents of these systems, and it
unquestioningly cites unscientific testimonials like this one:

> Kristen Mahoney, who runs the camera program for the Baltimore
> police, said cameras have helped stop crimes from illegal dumping
> to homicide. She said authorities have received 200 requests from
> people who want cameras in their neighborhoods and no requests to
> remove them.

Mahoney's claim that the cameras are effective is just that, a
claim. Further, it's a claim from someone who has a vested interest
in the continuance of the program. Where's the evidence to support
that assertion? Stating that they've received 200 requests for
cameras and no requests to remove them is not the same as providing
hard, scientific evidence that the technology actually does what
its proponents claim, namely, dramatically reduce crime.

If, as a society, we're going to continue down the road toward a
[surveillance][]
[nation][], we
deserve more than the unsubstantiated assurances of politicians and
law enforcement personnel that this technology works. Given the
enormous potential for abuse, we, as citizens, should demand that
this technology be *proven* to deter statistically meaningful
levels of crime, that it be deployed only when a clear case can be
made that it is necessary, and that proper safeguards are in place
to prevent its abuse by those in power.

[Philadelphia Inquirer]: http://www.philly.com/mld/inquirer/
[a city councilman is pushing for a referendum on installing video surveillance cameras on public streets.]: http://www.philly.com/mld/inquirer/news/front/13834547.htm
[Electronic Privacy Information Center]: http://www.epic.org/
[link]: http://www.epic.org/privacy/surveillance/spotlight/0505/
[surveillance]: http://www.fish2.com/security/surv-nation.pdf
[nation]: http://www.fish2.com/security/surv-nation2.pdf
