{{
page.templates: article=%s.html, printable-article=%spr.html
page.title: ENODICK
page.tags: people, second life
page.date: 2007-07-16 17:24:50
noTOC: true
---
The peculiarities of virtual sex in Second Life, with an emphasis
on the word "why?"
}}

A recent [LA Times article][] described the disappointment of real world
businesses that have set up virtual shops in [Second Life][]. Here are a
couple interesting quotes from the article:

> ... the sites of many of the companies remaining in Second Life are
> empty. During a recent in-world visit, Best Buy Co.'s Geek Squad
> Island was devoid of visitors and the virtual staff that was
> supposed to be online.
> 
> The schedule of events on Sun Microsystems Inc.'s site was blank,
> and the green landscape of Dell Island was deserted. Signs posted
> on the window of the empty American Apparel store said it had
> closed up shop.
> 
> ...
> 
> For some advertisers, the problem is that Second Life is a
> fantasyland, and the representations of the people who play in it
> don't have human needs. Food and drink aren't necessary,
> teleporting is the easiest way to get around and clothing is
> optional. In fact, the human form itself is optional.
> 
> Avatars can play games, build beach huts, dress up like furry
> animals, flirt with strangers -- sometimes all at once.
> 
> Their interests seem to tend toward the risque. Ian Schafer, chief
> executive of online marketing firm Deep Focus, which advises
> clients about entering virtual worlds, said he recently toured
> Second Life. He started at the Aloft hotel and found it empty. He
> moved on to casinos, brothels and strip clubs, and they were
> packed. Schafer said he found in his research that "one of the most
> frequently purchased items in Second Life is genitalia."

Regarding that last point, there are quite a few articles and blog
entries on that very topic, including, for instance these:

-   [Two Days in Second Life][]
-   [Second Life and What It has Taught Me][]
-   A [Wired][] [Second Life shopping guide][]
    explains, among other things, exactly where to go to buy the right
    kind of penis.

In the geek world, Second Life gets a lot of ink. Wired and other
techno-oriented sites seem to mention it at least once a week. The
breathless hype is continual.

Finally, a few months ago, I succumbed and decided to try it, just
to see what the fuss was about (and despite never being much of a
video gamer). The basic account is free, after all. Frankly, I
found it boring and rather socially desolate. But that's just me.
Ian Schafer's characterization seems dead-on: The most popular
places are the decadent ones. There's something hilarious, surreal,
and just a little creepy about walking into a virtual strip club
and seeing virtual women strip and gyrate, while patrons (mostly
male-seeming avatars, but some furries, some female-seeming
avatars, and many with blue skin) sit ogling at the virtual bar or
dancing on a virtual dance floor.

Then it goes all geeky--well, *more* geeky. When two avatars start
to talk to one another, you hear a keyboard sound, and the avatars
are animated to look like they're typing on an invisible,
chest-high keyboard. Suddenly, you're at a computer show or a Star
Trek convention or something, except that the virtual half-naked
women are still gyrating in the background, while the avatars are
air-typing in the foreground. The air-typing thing is weird, but it
also seems, somehow, correct for the place.

Wander around one of the cities, though, and the shops and
buildings, while pristine looking, are largely devoid of people.
Everyone's in a strip club, or they're at some party, or they've
teleported to some Fantasy Island--except for the newbies who (like
me, when I tried it) are trying to get a feel for flying,
teleporting, walking, looking around, and other basic navigation
skills. Unless, of course, they're restyling their avatar. You can
always tell when someone's doing that, because their avatar
suddenly assumes this position that looks vaguely like they're
about to be beamed up by an alien: arms to the side and away from
the body, leaning slightly backward, gaze (such as it is) fixed and
staring. And then, suddenly, the avatar is a different color, or
has different hair, or has a beard, or has even larger breasts, or
...

When creating, restyling, or dressing your avatar, you notice right
away--you can't help but notice--that you have no dick. You're a
digital Ken doll. According to one
[Kate Amdahl][], this
absence of genitalia afflicts only male avatars. She writes:

> Girls don't need to buy any, although I do suggest buying an
> anatomically complete skin that displays the right parts in the
> right places. The way SL is programmed, there's sort of an
> assumption that things can go right into you wherever they may want
> to, so you don't have to buy anything to make that happen.
> 
> For boys, it's another matter. You may already have looked into
> your trousers and noticed the disturbing fact that what you have is
> more of a little pedestal than a statue to put on it. What you need
> to do is buy a penis.

Apparently, this lack of a virtual dick you cannot feel is
troublesome enough to most people that it's one of the first things
they seek to add on. According to some reports, the Second Life
genitalia trade is brisk. (I wouldn't know. I didn't buy one. I
didn't actually want to spend any money in there, on anything.)

Sex is big is Second Life--though, to be honest, I don't see the
attraction. Ms. Amdahl claims that the actual pleasure in virtual
sex comes "in the form of chat and the scene in front of you. The
scene usually involves an animation or three ... Some people are
all watching and clicking and no chat, while others may not care
much about animations and are mostly fired up by the chat." You
have to purchases the animations, which make the avatars actually
"perform" on the screen. This sounds more like a communal porn
experience, except with weird-looking avatars instead of real
people. Or phone sex, without the human vocal context and the
emotional contact that implies. Sex in Second Life sounds like
drinking in Second Life: It's something that's completely devoid of
sensation. Even flying in Second Life would seem to have more
apparent feeling (imparted by the visuals and the
[George Reeves][] Superman-like
flying sound) than sex in Second Life.

At one point at the very beginning, while trying to get my avatar's
legs to work the way I wanted (a feat that takes surprisingly
little practice, actually), I wandered around and stumbled across
two avatars "having sex". I know that's what they were doing
because the female said to the male, "Let's go over here and have
sex." Otherwise, it was hard to tell. The ostensible male was
kneeling with his face in the ostensible female's ostensible
crotch. (They had, by the way, walked underwater. Breathing is
optional in Second Life.) Curious as to what sex was in Second
Life, I stayed at a respectable distance--a definition of
respectable that wouldn't fly in the real world, but seemed
perfectably acceptable there--and played the voyeur for a minute.
Almost immediately, I saw the girl's virtual hands go into typing
position, heard the simulated clackety clack, and saw a balloon
come up with her words. Evidently, my avatar was close enough to
"hear". Sex being what it is (or isn't) in Second Life, what she
said was, "Hey, you blowin' me or what?" Figuring that I'd gotten
the lay of the land (pun intended), I chose that moment to walk
away. Okay, so based on what I've read since, I *hadn't* actually
gotten the lay of the land; the two amorous avatars clearly hadn't
purchased the requisite animation.

But, I must confess that I don't get the attraction of virtual sex.
I mean, if it were accompanied by
[teledildonics][] (which,
I'm sure, it will be at some point in the not-too-distant future),
I could understand the allure. But in Second Life as it exists
right now, what's the point? The visuals are goofy (and, I'm sorry,
but I can't see how the animations change that, really), and you
certainly can't feel anything. As for the chat, well, sex chat with
an avatar just doesn't seem all that appealing to me. Plus, odds
are at least 50-50 that the bluish, curvy woman avatar you're
virtually screwing is controlled by some lonely 34-year-old guy
sitting by himself in a darkened room. Maybe that's part of the
allure for some, but it doesn't work for me.

I also don't get attraction of Second Life. I can see where it's
appealing, at some level; the rules and prevailing ethos in Second
Life are a lot closer to the
[Burning Man][] festival or
[Woodstock][] than they are to normal
everyday existence. It's almost like a permanent beach party or
college bash. But, ultimately, it seems like a colossal waste of
time. Visiting Burning Man might be cool once a year or so, but
spending several hours a day there (as some people do with Second
Life) seems like a waste of life. (Some will argue that it's better
than spending several hours a day watching television. That's
probably true, but that's setting the bar awfully low.)

In any case, it's clear that any company that opens up a real
world-style branch office or store front in Second Life and expects
to go about business as usual is suffering from a form of corporate
delusion. It's a completely different world in there. If you're
inclined to try commerce in Second Life, ask yourself this
question: How would I have sold my product at a Grateful Dead
concert?

*(The title of this blog entry is a Unix geek joke. See [here][] for an explanation.)*

[LA Times article]: http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-secondlife14jul14,1,3135510.story?coll=la-headlines-business
[Second Life]: http://www.secondlife.com/
[Two Days in Second Life]: http://www.oddtodd.com/message665.html
[Second Life and What It has Taught Me]: http://keepinitrealyo.blogspot.com/2006/07/second-life-and-what-it-has-taught-me.html
[Wired]: http://www.wired.com/
[Second Life shopping guide]: http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/14.10/slshopping.html
[Kate Amdahl]: http://kateamdahl.livejournal.com/927.html
[George Reeves]: http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001660
[teledildonics]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teledildonics
[Burning Man]: http://www.burningman.com/
[Woodstock]: http://www.woodstock69.com/
[here]: http://www.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=errno&amp;apropos=0&amp;sektion=0&amp;manpath=FreeBSD+6.2-RELEASE&amp;format=html
