{{
page.templates: article=%s.html, printable-article=%spr.html
page.title: ENODICK, reprise
page.tags: people, second life
page.date: 2007-07-30 12:00:14
---
More on virtual sex in Second Life.
}}

In my [last post][], I
mentioned the apparently high prevalence of virtual sex in
[Second Life][]. I also quoted from
[Kate Amdahl's][] blog; she
discusses such matters at length. (Apropos of nothing, "Kate
Amdahl" is her
[Second Life name][]. I
do not know who she is "for real".)

To my surprise, a few days later, I received an email from Ms.
Amdahl, responding to my comments. We had a brief email exchange. I
quote from her email messages, with her permission.

> I came across your blog entry about Second Life, the
> less-than-mind-blowingly-impressive way First Life companies have
> (not) gained a foothold there, and, of course, sex. I noticed you
> brought up the excellent question of why people have sex in Second
> Life, which at first blush may seem...well, the words "woefully
> inadequate" come to mind. Fortunately, it's sometimes joyful and
> marvelous, but knowing this isn't immediately apparent, a while
> back I wrote about why people have sex in Second Life
> [here][]. For good
> measure, I gave some good reasons not to have sex in Second Life
> [there][].
> 
> Just in case the question's of interest. :)

For those who are curious about Second Life virtual sex, her
comments are worth reading. But there's still an unanswered
question.

**Why is Second Life Special?**

What originally drew me into this whole discussion was a set of
unrelated articles I'd seen over the space of a couple of weeks
that talked about the allegedly large amount of virtual sex in
Second Life, relative to other possible Second Life pursuits. (The
various comments I read about about there being a thriving trade in
penises was just a rather hilarious way to illustrate that
assertion.) That got me wondering:

-   What, specifically, attracts people to virtual Second Life sex?
-   What is it about Second Life, in particular, that makes the
    pursuit of virtual sex the single largest pursuit, dwarfing by a
    large margin all other pursuits?

Quoting Ms. Amdahl again:

> As to why sex is so popular in Second Life, I have two theories off
> the top of my head that probably turn out to be just one theory in
> the end. The first is that a large percentage of the adult
> population of the world isn't sexually satisfied, and Second Life
> offers a comparatively easy, safe, and cheap way to meet those
> needs - especially sexual desires that have more to do with fantasy
> than with real-life experiences. So probably many people who use
> Second Life find that they can scratch that itch in that way, and a
> lot of other people come to Second Life specifically to have that
> itch scratched.
> 
> The other theory is that many people don't feel enough intimacy in
> their lives, and that this is complicated by intimacy usually
> meaning increased danger. Virtual sex (done well) is one of the
> most intimate things you could do with another person through a
> computer, and it's far safer--emotionally, physically, and
> socially--than intimacy in First Life.
> 
> With that said, as I mention elsewhere, I think that Second Life
> sex is generally a gap-filler and not a way to satisfyingly run a
> person's life permanently, at least for the great majority of
> people. I expect that most of us will use it as a sort of phase in
> our personal development and then move on, ideally with something
> good learned.

Okay, I'll buy that. But I still get the sense that there's
something special about Second Life in this regard. There are other
virtual worlds out there (e.g.,
[World of Warcraft][] and
[EverQuest][]). You don't read
about huge numbers of people engaging in virtual sex in those
worlds. So, assuming the reports of rampant virtual sex in Second
Life aren't mere sensationalistic distortions, what *is* it about
Second Life that seems to promote this kind of behavior?

Several theories leap immediately to mind. Of course, I'm neither a
sociologist nor a highly experienced Second Lifer, so these
theories are pure speculation.

-   Second Life makes satisfying virtual sex more achievable. This
    reason may, in fact, be plausible; I don't know. From what I've
    read and what little I've seen, Second Life is customizable to a
    surprising degree through animations, clothing, skins, etc. Is it
    more flexible than other places (e.g., "World of Warcraft" and its
    ilk)? I don't know the answer to that. But if it *is* more flexible
    (no pun intended), then that might be a contributing factor.
-   Second Life is less of a directed place. To put it another way,
    there's no explicit point to Second Life; it's just there, as a
    medium for people to interact how they please. This would contrast
    with the more explicitly quest-oriented worlds, where the "point"
    is more like a traditional
    [D&amp;amp;D game][]:
    going on quests; killing beasties; accumulating experience, power
    and money; etc. In a virtual world with an explicit point, people
    aren't there primarily to hang out; they're there to game, and the
    game generally isn't sex. In a virtual world with no explicit
    point, people get bored and eventually start screwing around.
-   Or, perhaps Second Life *does* have a point, and the point is
    social contact. Second Life does explicitly emphasize social
    contact, and social contact inevitably leads to sexual behavior of
    one kind or another--not necessarily in everyone, but in a large
    (and expected) percentage of people. This explanation may actually
    have the most merit. In my short time exploring Second Life, I
    noticed what appeared to be a deliberate attempt to foster a
    "tribe" mentality among Second Life denizens. The restricted set of
    last names, explicit comments in a help file about joining extended
    families, comments about forming communities, etc., all point to an
    intentional goal of fostering community and social networks. In
    Second Life, socializing *is*, largely, "the point." Virtual sex is
    a logical outgrowth of that.

I suspect the real answer is a combination of the above, and other,
reasons. I still don't find the idea of virtual sex personally
compelling; it just seems too *disconnected* to me. However, it
clearly *is* compelling for some. I suspect the whole "sex in
cyberspace" issue is only going to grow. The technology will
continue to improve, so that sex in a virtual online world may, at
some point, begin to feel more like "real" sex--and then a whole
new set of sociological questions will arise.

[last post]: http://www.clapper.org/bmc/blog/id/66
[Second Life]: http://www.secondlife.com/
[Kate Amdahl's]: http://kateamdahl.livejournal.com/
[Second Life name]: http://kateamdahl.livejournal.com/profile/
[here]: http://kateamdahl.livejournal.com/5094.html
[there]: http://kateamdahl.livejournal.com/4625.html
[World of Warcraft]: http://www.worldofwarcraft
[EverQuest]: http://everquest.station.sony.com/
[D&amp;amp;D game]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dungeons_&amp;_Dragons
