{{
page.templates: article=%s.html, printable-article=%spr.html
page.title: Gun Nuts
page.tags: people, guns
page.date: 2007-08-13 03:46:17
---
On guns and a certain type of gun nut.





}}

There's a certain kind of [gun nut][]
who annoys the crap out of me.

But, before I get into *that*, let me offer a little background.

I'm not some "soft" knee-jerk anti-gun type who thinks all guns
should be banned under all circumstances. Sure, I'm a product of
the suburbs, but my family is, largely, farm-folk. I am familiar
with firearms. I've held and fired shotguns, rifles, and pistols.
And, yes, I've enjoyed doing so. But I do not, today, own a firearm
of any kind. That's not to say I would *never* own one, but I see
no need to own one now, and I don't get my rocks off blasting paper
targets at the local firing range (though I will admit that I can
understand the appeal).

I view a gun the same way I view my chainsaw: as a sometimes
useful, and always dangerous, tool. When I need my chainsaw, it's
because pretty much nothing else will do the job. And, I will
admit, a chainsaw can be loads of fun. But it's also dangerous as
hell, and it's the utter fool who forgets that reality.

So it is with guns. They are, sometimes, useful. If you live in a
rural area, hunting is a good way to put meat on your table. Hell,
even in suburbia, I can't entirely decry hunting. For instance, we
humans have completely supplanted every other natural deer
predator; as a result, deer run rampant. In
[Valley Forge National Park][], for
instance, the deer are so nonchalant about people that you can
easily get within 20 feet of one of them before it'll bolt. Hunters
are the only predators they have left.

I'm not against *responsible* gun use. But my definition of
"responsible" excludes the kind of movie-poster posturing evidenced
by
[this photo][].
While I'm sure the Well-Known Open Source Personality therein
depicited intended the photo to be lighthearted, it exhibits, to
me, a wholly adolescent attitude toward a deadly weapon, and it
invites the obvious Freudian inference that there's some serious
compensatin' going on there. It also demonstrates a form of
zealotry--and, frankly, zealots of *all* stripes make me very
nervous, indeed.

Guns have their legitimate uses. So do chainsaws. But I have no
time for Hollywood-style posturing when it comes to deadly tools.




[gun nut]: http://www.catb.org/~esr/guns/
[Valley Forge National Park]: http://www.nps.gov/vafo/
[this photo]: http://www.catb.org/~esr/graphics/raymond007-7.jpg
