{{
page.templates: article=%s.html, printable-article=%spr.html
page.title: Making XML-RPC calls from a Google App Engine application
page.tags: python, App Engine, programming, XML-RPC
page.date: 2008-08-25 16:37:28
---
Google [App Engine][] (GAE) is a useful
platform on which to develop Python-based web applications. But a
GAE application runs in a
[sandbox][]
that prevents it from opening a socket, which makes the standard
Python `xmlrpclib` module inoperable.

Fortunately, there's a simple solution to this problem.




[App Engine]: http://appengine.google.com/
[sandbox]: http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/sandbox.html

}}

# Introduction

Google [App Engine][] (GAE) is a useful
platform on which to develop Python-based web applications. But a
GAE application runs in a
[sandbox][]
that prevents it from opening a socket, which makes the standard
Python `xmlrpclib` module inoperable.

Fortunately, there's a simple solution to this problem.

This article is broken into several parts: First, I discuss the
code that's necessary to get `xmlrpclib` to work within a GAE
application. Then, I show how to enhance
[picoblog][], the
sample GAE blogging engine I developed for my
[Writing Blogging Software for Google App Engine][]
article, so that it can send a "ping" to
[Technorati][] when a new article is
published.

# Getting XML-RPC to work with GAE

## A Quick Overview of `xmlrpclib`

It's entirely possible to do XML-RPC without the benefit of the
standard Python `xmlrpclib` module. But `xmlrpclib` makes things so
much simpler that it'd be nice to use it. Doing the job manually
means building an XML message, sending it to the remote HTTP
server, reading the result XML, and parsing that XML. `xmlrpclib`
already does all that. But `xmlrpclib` attempts to open a socket to
connect to the remote HTTP server, and opening a socket is strictly
forbidden by the GAE
[sandbox][].

Ideally, we want to use `xmlrpclib`, but have it connect to the
remote HTTP server using the
[fetch()][]
function provided by the `google.appengine.api.urlfetch` module. We
*could* create our own hacked version of `xmlrpclib` to do just
that, but, luckily, the authors of `xmlrpclib` thought ahead and
made the library easy to extend.

### Sample XML-RPC call

Typically, making an XML-RPC call through `xmlrpclib` requires code
like this:

    rpc_server = xmlrpclib.ServerProxy('http://rpc.technorati.com/rpc/ping')
    result = rpc_server.weblogUpdates.ping('My Blog Name', 
                                           'http://picoblog.example.com/')
    # The result is dictionary. In Technorati's case, we have to check the
    # flerror element.
    if result.get('flerror', False) == True:
        logging.error('Technorati ping error from server: %s' %
                      result.get('message', '(No message in RPC result)'))
    else:
        logging.debug('Technorati ping successful.')

There are a couple things going on here. The first line of code
sets up a `ServerProxy` object that allows us to interact with the
remote RPC server. The actual method call looks just like a method
call. The `xmlrpclib` module translates this line of code:

    result = rpc_server.weblogUpdates.ping('My Blog Name', 'http://picoblog.example.com/')

into the following chunk of XML, which it then sends to the remote
web server:

    &lt;?xml version="1.0"?&gt;
    &lt;methodCall&gt;
      &lt;methodName&gt;weblogUpdates.ping&lt;/methodName&gt;
      &lt;params&gt;
        &lt;param&gt;
          &lt;value&gt;My Blog Name&lt;/value&gt;
        &lt;/param&gt;
        &lt;param&gt;
          &lt;value&gt;http://picoblog.example.com/&lt;/value&gt;
        &lt;/param&gt;
      &lt;/params&gt;
    &lt;/methodCall&gt;

It then waits for the XML-RPC response and decodes it into a
dictionary of name-value pairs. Just for completeness, here's the
successful result from a Technorati ping:

    &lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
    &lt;methodResponse&gt;
        &lt;params&gt;
            &lt;param&gt;
                &lt;value&gt;
                    &lt;struct&gt;
                        &lt;member&gt;
                            &lt;name&gt;flerror&lt;/name&gt;
                            &lt;value&gt;&lt;boolean&gt;0&lt;/boolean&gt;&lt;/value&gt;
                        &lt;/member&gt;
                        &lt;member&gt;
                            &lt;name&gt;message&lt;/name&gt;
                            &lt;value&gt;&lt;string&gt;Thanks for the ping&lt;/string&gt;&lt;/value&gt;
                        &lt;/member&gt;
                    &lt;/struct&gt;
                &lt;/value&gt;
            &lt;/param&gt;
        &lt;/params&gt;
    &lt;/methodResponse&gt;

And here's the failure result:

    &lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
    &lt;methodResponse&gt;
        &lt;params&gt;
            &lt;param&gt;
                &lt;value&gt;
                    &lt;struct&gt;
                        &lt;member&gt;
                            &lt;name&gt;flerror&lt;/name&gt;
                            &lt;value&gt;&lt;boolean&gt;0&lt;/boolean&gt;&lt;/value&gt;
                        &lt;/member&gt;
                        &lt;member&gt;
                            &lt;name&gt;message&lt;/name&gt;
                            &lt;value&gt;
                                &lt;string&gt;You just sent a ping, please only
                                ping when you update &lt;/string&gt;
                            &lt;/value&gt;
                        &lt;/member&gt;
                    &lt;/struct&gt;
                &lt;/value&gt;
            &lt;/param&gt;
        &lt;/params&gt;
    &lt;/methodResponse&gt;

## `xmlrpclib` Transport Classes

As written, the code, above, won't work, because `xmlrpclib`
attempts to create a socket to connect to the web server, and GAE's
[sandbox][]
forbids creating sockets.

However, under the covers, `xmlrpclib` uses special *transport*
objects to make the connections to the remote HTTP server. The
standard transport object is an instance of the
`xmlrpclib.Transport` class; you can examine that class by looking
at the
[xmlrpclib.py source code][]
in your Python distribution. Here's a portion of that class; the
method we care about is `request()`:

    class Transport:
        """Handles an HTTP transaction to an XML-RPC server."""
    
        user_agent = "xmlrpclib.py/%s (by www.pythonware.com)" % __version__
    
        def __init__(self, use_datetime=0):
            self._use_datetime = use_datetime
    
        def request(self, host, handler, request_body, verbose=0):
            # issue XML-RPC request
    
            h = self.make_connection(host)
            if verbose:
                h.set_debuglevel(1)
    
            self.send_request(h, handler, request_body)
            self.send_host(h, host)
            self.send_user_agent(h)
            self.send_content(h, request_body)
    
            errcode, errmsg, headers = h.getreply()
    
            if errcode != 200:
                raise ProtocolError(
                    host + handler,
                    errcode, errmsg,
                    headers
                    )
    
            self.verbose = verbose
    
            try:
                sock = h._conn.sock
            except AttributeError:
                sock = None
    
            return self._parse_response(h.getfile(), sock)
    
        def getparser(self):
            # get parser and unmarshaller
            return getparser(use_datetime=self._use_datetime)
    
        def _parse_response(self, file, sock):
            # read response from input file/socket, and parse it
    
            p, u = self.getparser()
    
            while 1:
                if sock:
                    response = sock.recv(1024)
                else:
                    response = file.read(1024)
                if not response:
                    break
                if self.verbose:
                    print "body:", repr(response)
                p.feed(response)
    
            file.close()
            p.close()
    
            return u.close()

The class is considerably larger than that, but `request()` is the
only method that's required by the interface.

As it happens, the `ServerProxy` class lets us pass in our own
transport object; if we don't supply one, it uses its `Transport`
object (if the connection is not an SSL connection). This is the
key to our GAE solution.

## The `GAEXMLRPCTransport` class

We can create our own transport class that uses the
`google.appengine.api.urlfetch` module's
[fetch()][]
method instead of standard socket access. That class turns out to
be pretty simple:

    import sys
    import xmlrpclib
    import logging
    
    from google.appengine.api import urlfetch
    
    class GAEXMLRPCTransport(object):
        """Handles an HTTP transaction to an XML-RPC server."""
    
        def __init__(self):
            pass
    
        def request(self, host, handler, request_body, verbose=0):
            result = None
            url = 'http://%s%s' % (host, handler)
            try:
                response = urlfetch.fetch(url,
                                          payload=request_body,
                                          method=urlfetch.POST,
                                          headers={'Content-Type': 'text/xml'})
            except:
                msg = 'Failed to fetch %s' % url
                logging.error(msg)
                raise xmlrpclib.ProtocolError(host + handler, 500, msg, {})
    
            if response.status_code != 200:
                logging.error('%s returned status code %s' % 
                              (url, response.status_code))
                raise xmlrpclib.ProtocolError(host + handler,
                                              response.status_code,
                                              "",
                                              response.headers)
            else:
                result = self.__parse_response(response.content)
    
            return result
    
        def __parse_response(self, response_body):
            p, u = xmlrpclib.getparser(use_datetime=False)
            p.feed(response_body)
            return u.close()

There are several things to note about the `request()` method.

-   It uses the `fetch()` method from the GAE API.
-   It scrupulously raises `xmlrpclib` exceptions on error
    conditions.
-   It uses `xmlrpclib` function `getparser()` to parse the result.
    Unlike the response parsing logic in the `xmlrpclib.Transport`
    class, ours is much simpler, since it has the entire response in
    hand and doesn't have to read it a bufferful at a time.

Using the `GAEXMLRPCTransport()` class, we can now make our XML-RPC
client code work within GAE:

    rpc_server = xmlrpclib.ServerProxy('http://rpc.technorati.com/rpc/ping',
                                       GAEXMLRPCTransport())
    result = rpc_server.weblogUpdates.ping('My Blog Name', 
                                           'http://picoblog.example.com/')
    # The result is dictionary. In Technorati's case, we have to check the
    # flerror element.
    if result.get('flerror', False) == True:
        logging.error('Technorati ping error from server: %s' %
                      result.get('message', '(No message in RPC result)'))
    else:
        logging.debug('Technorati ping successful.')

# Changes to `picoblog`

Finally, as a proof of concept, let's change the `picoblog`
software (see \`Related Brizzled Articles\`\_, below) to ping
Technorati whenever an article is published for the first time.

## New `xmlrpc.py` module

First, put the `GAEXMLRPCTransport` class in its own `xmlrpc.py`
file, and put that file at the root of the `picoblog` source tree.

## Changes to `defs.py`

Next, we add a few things to the `defs.py` module:

    CANONICAL_BLOG_URL = 'http://picoblog.appspot.com/'
    
    import os
    _server_software = os.environ.get('SERVER_SOFTWARE','').lower()
    if _server_software.startswith('goog'):
        ON_GAE = True
    else:
        ON_GAE = False
    del _server_software

The `CANONICAL_BLOG_URL` constant defines the URL of our blog; we
have to include that information in the Technorati ping. (We
*could* figure that out from the request that posts the article to
be saved, but using a constant is simpler for now.) The second
block of code sets `ON_GAE` to `True` if we're running on App
Engine, and `False` if we're running within the local development
server. During tests on the development server, we'll ping a fake
URL; see below.

## Changes to `admin.py`

### `SaveArticleHandler`

The bulk of the changes are in the `admin.py` module. First, we
have to modify the `SaveArticleHandler` class to detect when an
article is published and notify Technorati when that happens. (GAE
invokes an instance of the `SaveArticleHandler` class to process
the "save article" action.) We'll use a simple definition of
"published": When the "draft" flag is cleared.

Here's the new version of `SaveArticleHandler`:

    class SaveArticleHandler(request.BlogRequestHandler):
        """
        Handles form submissions to save an edited article.
        """
        def post(self):
            title = cgi.escape(self.request.get('title'))
            body = cgi.escape(self.request.get('content'))
            s_id = cgi.escape(self.request.get('id'))
            id = int(s_id) if s_id else None
            tags = cgi.escape(self.request.get('tags'))
            published_when = cgi.escape(self.request.get('published_when'))
            draft = cgi.escape(self.request.get('draft'))
            if tags:
                tags = [t.strip() for t in tags.split(',')]
            else:
                tags = []
            tags = Article.convert_string_tags(tags)
    
            if not draft:
                draft = False
            else:
                draft = (draft.lower() == 'on')
    
            article = Article.get(id) if id else None
            if article:
                # It's an edit of an existing item.
                just_published = article.draft and (not draft)
                article.title = title
                article.body = body
                article.tags = tags
                article.draft = draft
            else:
                # It's new.
                article = Article(title=title,
                                  body=body,
                                  tags=tags,
                                  draft=draft)
                just_published = not draft
    
            article.save()
    
            if just_published:
                logging.debug('Article %d just went from draft to published. '
                              'Alerting the media.' % article.id)
                alert_the_media()
    
            edit_again = cgi.escape(self.request.get('edit_again'))
            edit_again = edit_again and (edit_again.lower() == 'true')
            if edit_again:
                self.redirect('/admin/article/edit/?id=%s' % article.id)
            else:
                self.redirect('/admin/')

Here are the relevant changes:

    article = Article.get(id) if id else None
    if article:
        # It's an edit of an existing item.
        just_published = article.draft and (not draft)
        article.title = title
        article.body = body
        article.tags = tags
        article.draft = draft
    else:
        # It's new.
        article = Article(title=title,
                          body=body,
                          tags=tags,
                          draft=draft)
        just_published = not draft
    
    ...
    
    if just_published:
        logging.debug('Article %d just went from draft to published. '
                      'Alerting the media.' % article.id)
        alert_the_media()

Determining that the article was just published is trivial. If it
*has* just been published, we call a (new) `alert_the_media()`
function.

### The `alert_the_media()` function

This function sends the appropriate alerts to whichever external
web sites we think should hear about new articles. Currently,
that's only Technorati, but we might want to add more later, so it
doesn't hurt to put this logic in a separate function.

The `alert_the_media()` function is simple enough:

    def alert_the_media():
        # Right now, we only alert Technorati
        ping_technorati()

### The `ping_technorati()` function

Finally, we get to the function that *uses* our XML-RPC coolness.
It's not a whole lot different from the \`sample XML-RPC call\`\_
at the top of the article:

    def ping_technorati():
        if defs.ON_GAE:
            url = TECHNORATI_PING_RPC_URL
        else:
            url = FAKE_TECHNORATI_PING_RPC_URL
    
        logging.debug('Pinging Technorati at: %s' % url)
        try:
            transport = xmlrpc.GoogleXMLRPCTransport()
            rpc_server = xmlrpclib.ServerProxy(url, transport=transport)
            result = rpc_server.weblogUpdates.ping(defs.BLOG_NAME,
                                                   defs.CANONICAL_BLOG_URL)
            if result.get('flerror', False) == True:
                logging.error('Technorati ping error from server: %s' %
                              result.get('message', '(No message in RPC result)'))
            else:
                logging.debug('Technorati ping successful.')
        except:
            raise urlfetch.DownloadError, \
                  "Can't ping Technorati: %s" % sys.exc_info()[1]

Note the first four lines, though. They say:

-   If we're running on GAE, use the real Technorati ping URL.
-   Otherwise, use a fake one.

Those constants are defined at the top of `admin.py`:

    TECHNORATI_PING_RPC_URL = 'http://rpc.technorati.com/rpc/ping'
    FAKE_TECHNORATI_PING_RPC_URL = 'http://localhost/~bmc/technorati-mock.xml'

The fake URL is nothing more than a canned page. On my development
machine, I run an instance of the
[Apache HTTP server][]. In my personal
web page area, I created a static XML file containing the canned
result of a Technorati ping. (See above.) That way, I can test the
XML-RPC logic without actually pinging Technorati for real.

And that's all there is to it.

# Potential Problems

Note that XML-RPC calls can fail for several reasons, including:

1.  The XML-RPC response is too large. GAE defines a
    `ResponseTooLargeError` that is sent when the response data exceeds
    the maximum allowed size and the `allow_truncated` parameter passed
    to
    [fetch()][]
    was `False`. Passing `allow_truncated=True` to
    [fetch()][]
    isn't especially helpful, so there isn't much we can do about this
    error.
2.  The remote HTTP server takes too long to respond. There's not
    much we can do about this error.

# Getting the Code

The code used in this article is available at
[http://www.clapper.org/software/python/picoblog/.][]

# Related Brizzled Articles

-   [Writing Blogging Software for Google App Engine][]
-   [Adding Page caching to a GAE application][]

# Additional Reading

-   [XML-RPC HOWTO][]
-   The
    [xmlrpclib.py source code][]
-   The
    [xmlrpclib documentation][]
-   [Building Scalable Web Applications with Google App Engine][]
    (presentation), by Google's Brett Slatkin.
-   [Google App Engine documentation][]




[App Engine]: http://appengine.google.com/
[sandbox]: http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/sandbox.html
[picoblog]: http://www.clapper.org/software/python/picoblog/
[Writing Blogging Software for Google App Engine]: http://brizzled.clapper.org/id/77
[Technorati]: http://www.technorati.com/
[sandbox]: http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/sandbox.html
[fetch()]: http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/urlfetch/fetchfunction.html
[sandbox]: http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/sandbox.html
[xmlrpclib.py source code]: http://svn.python.org/projects/python/trunk/Lib/xmlrpclib.py
[fetch()]: http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/urlfetch/fetchfunction.html
[Apache HTTP server]: http://www.apache.org/httpd/
[fetch()]: http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/urlfetch/fetchfunction.html
[fetch()]: http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/urlfetch/fetchfunction.html
[http://www.clapper.org/software/python/picoblog/.]: http://www.clapper.org/software/python/picoblog/.
[Writing Blogging Software for Google App Engine]: http://brizzled.clapper.org/id/77
[Adding Page caching to a GAE application]: http://brizzled.clapper.org/id/78
[XML-RPC HOWTO]: http://www.tldp.org/HOWTO/XML-RPC-HOWTO/index.html
[xmlrpclib.py source code]: http://svn.python.org/projects/python/trunk/Lib/xmlrpclib.py
[xmlrpclib documentation]: http://docs.python.org/lib/module-xmlrpclib.html
[Building Scalable Web Applications with Google App Engine]: http://sites.google.com/site/io/building-scalable-web-applications-with-google-app-engine
[Google App Engine documentation]: http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/
