{{
page.articleTemplate: article=%s.html
page.alternateTemplates: printable-article=pr-%s.html
page.title: A spam poem
page.tags: spam, poem, email
page.date: 2009-05-21 12:43:14
noTOC: true
---
A spam "poem", consisting entirely of subject lines from my junk
email folder.
}}

*(Each line was a single subject from my spam folder, on May 16, 2009.)*

<div class="condensed-paragraphs">
Impress her with your performance.  
Make your zipper knight the best in the whole town.  
Your bedroom doesn't smell like passion.  
We sell the best alarm clocks for your small buddy down there.  
Increase your self-worth by wearing this watch.  
Beautiful watches.  
Branded watches for a song.  
Bags and wallets.  
Swiss Branded Watches.  
Best-selling luxury bags and wallets.  
Top quality replicas for sale.  
\*\*\* All hand made \*\*\*  
Ascent your darling sexuality.  
Lift your bed event.  
Hoist your bed evening.  
Uplift your beloved night times.  
A complete male in bed is all the time ready.  
Enlarging your male tool means winning a war.  
Make your hose's radius great.  
Erase the memories of the defeat.  
If watering your tool doesn't help it to grow  
Find yourself in the size that matches your personality.  
From now on, you will be able to please any size-queen.  
Incredible, unbelievable gains achieved.  
Could you imagine your life with no pain and disabilities?  
Feeling bad? We may make you feel healthy very quickly.  
Forget about sadness and be in a fantastic mood all the time.  
You have a chance to turn back the hands of time and be young
again.  
Hi!  
I can tell you the future.  
You've received A Hallmark E-Card!  
I am lonely Russian girl.  
Did u see that?  
Fully furnished apartments for rent in Ulaanbaatar!  
CONGRATULATIONS, WINNER!  
YOUR EMAIL WON THIS PRIZE.  
Your Paypal account has been compromised.
</div>

